Copilot/find instances of cite (#294)
symbiotic-engineering/MDOcean: pubs/renewable-energy-mdo/sections/introduction.tex

    Automating concurrent decision-making allows WEC designers to systematically explore tradeoffs across major design choices and, ultimately, to compare architectures on a standardized footing.

    A landmark step toward a multidisciplinary WEC design baseline was the U.S.\ Department of Energy's Reference Model Project (2010--2014), which produced six benchmark designs along with design artifacts and a comprehensive report \citep{RM3}.\footnote{\url{https://openei.org/wiki/PRIMRE/Signature_Projects/Reference_Model}}
    The third reference model (RM3), a two-body point-absorber WEC sited for Humboldt Bay, California, has received considerable research attention.
    Its surface float oscillates against a spar consisting of a vertical column and a subsurface damping plate (\Cref{remdo:fig:rm3-parts}), with electrical power produced from the relative heave motion.
    The present study builds on that work, presenting a multidisciplinary techno-economic optimization of RM3.
\else

>     Wave energy converters (WECs) can deliver both utility-scale electricity and power for offshore applications such as aquaculture, desalination, and marine sensing \citet{livecchi_powering_2019,akdemir_opportunities_2023,bhattacharya_timing_2021,pennock_temporal_2022}, but large-scale deployment requires substantial cost reduction.

Author: ```suggestion
    Wave energy converters (WECs) can deliver both utility-scale electricity and power for offshore applications such as aquaculture, desalination, and marine sensing \citep{livecchi_powering_2019,akdemir_opportunities_2023,bhattacharya_timing_2021,pennock_temporal_2022}, but large-scale deployment requires substantial cost reduction.
```

\ifdefined\DISSERTATION
    Before reviewing the academic state of the art, it is worth assessing how optimization and concurrent design are practiced in the wave energy industry.

>     A survey of 25 WEC designers and developers \citet{trueworthy_wave_2020} reports that industry use of optimization is far from universal, with the highest adoption rates at 48\% and 40\% for controls and hydrodynamic shape respectively.

Author: ```suggestion
    \citet{trueworthy_wave_2020} surveys 25 WEC designers and developers to report that industry use of optimization is far from universal, with the highest adoption rates at 48\% and 40\% for controls and hydrodynamic shape respectively.
```

    The authors attribute this to the time, expertise, and computational resources optimization demands; the inability of optimization to capture all WEC requirements; and the diversity of available techniques.
    Half of respondents design all subsystems concurrently; the rest follow a sequential pattern (shape and PTO first, then controller and moorings, then power transportation).
    The same study concludes that concurrent design is promising but under-utilized, and emphasizes the importance of incorporating all design requirements at an early stage.
    
    Several review papers describe the state of the art in WEC design optimization.

>     \Cref{remdo:tab:lit} draws on these and the underlying primary literature \citet{garcia-teruel_review_2021,guo_geometric_2021,ringwood_empowering_2023,clark_reliability-based_2018,coe_survey_2018,ove_arup__partners_ltd_structural_2016,paduano_towards_2024,giannini_wave_2022} to compare the most relevant studies along modeling and optimization axes.

Author: ```suggestion
    \Cref{remdo:tab:lit} draws on these and the underlying primary literature \citep{garcia-teruel_review_2021,guo_geometric_2021,ringwood_empowering_2023,clark_reliability-based_2018,coe_survey_2018,ove_arup__partners_ltd_structural_2016,paduano_towards_2024,giannini_wave_2022} to compare the most relevant studies along modeling and optimization axes.
```

\else

>     A survey of 25 WEC designers \citet{trueworthy_wave_2020} reports that only 48\% and 40\% of developers use optimization for controls and hydrodynamic shape respectively, and only 50\% design all subsystems concurrently --- attributed to the time, expertise, and computational resources optimization demands, and concluding that concurrent design is a promising but under-utilized technique.

Author: ```suggestion
    After surveying 25 WEC designers, \citet{trueworthy_wave_2020} reports that only 48\% and 40\% of developers use optimization for controls and hydrodynamic shape respectively, and only 50\% design all subsystems concurrently due to the time, expertise, and computational resources that optimization demands.
    They conclude that concurrent design is a promising but under-utilized technique.
```

>     Review papers \citet{garcia-teruel_review_2021,guo_geometric_2021,ringwood_empowering_2023,clark_reliability-based_2018} and primary literature on WEC survivability guidelines \citet{coe_survey_2018,ove_arup__partners_ltd_structural_2016,paduano_towards_2024,giannini_wave_2022} together motivate the comparison in \Cref{remdo:tab:lit}.

Author: ```suggestion
    Review papers \citep{garcia-teruel_review_2021,guo_geometric_2021,ringwood_empowering_2023,clark_reliability-based_2018} and primary literature on WEC survivability guidelines \citep{coe_survey_2018,ove_arup__partners_ltd_structural_2016,paduano_towards_2024,giannini_wave_2022} together motivate the comparison in \Cref{remdo:tab:lit}.
```

    \citet{cotten_multi-objective_2022} performs a similar fatigue-load study for an attenuator-style WEC with eight design variables.
    \citet{abdulkadir_control_2024} performs an eight-variable shape optimization using semi-analytical hydrodynamics (MEEM) but no other disciplines beyond hydrodynamics and dynamics.

>     All seven of these large-scale studies \citet{khanal_multi-objective_2024,gaudin_single_2021,edwards_optimisation_2022,garcia-teruel_reliability-based_2021,garcia-teruel_design_2022,cotten_multi-objective_2022,abdulkadir_control_2024} use the genetic algorithm, a population-based heuristic.

Author: ```suggestion
    All seven of these large-scale studies \citep{khanal_multi-objective_2024,gaudin_single_2021,edwards_optimisation_2022,garcia-teruel_reliability-based_2021,garcia-teruel_design_2022,cotten_multi-objective_2022,abdulkadir_control_2024} use the genetic algorithm, a population-based heuristic.
```

    The alternative is local optimization, which lacks heuristic exploration but leverages smoothness and scales well to many design variables \citep{martins_engineering_2022}.
    \citet{housner_numerical_2024} attempted local optimization for a terminator-shape study and could only handle 3 of an intended 13 design variables due to time-domain simulation cost;
    \citet{garcia-teruel_reliability-based_2021,garcia-teruel_design_2022,cotten_multi-objective_2022} avoided that issue by simulating primarily in the frequency domain, falling back to time domain only for PTO constraints.

>     Design-of-experiment alternatives such as the Taguchi method \citet{al_shami_parameter_2019} enable systematic exploration without traditional optimizers.

Author: ```suggestion
    Design-of-experiment alternatives such as the Taguchi method \citep{al_shami_parameter_2019} enable systematic exploration without traditional optimizers.
```

>     Structural optimization of WECs faces an analogous compute bottleneck: FEA-based optimization is usually replaced by manual iteration \citep{RM3,mi_multi-scale_2025} (with these two studies notably encompassing mooring, powertrain, controls, structures, and detailed economics), commercial decoupled tools \citep{an_optimal_2024}, brute-force sweeps over analytical stress \citep{ambuhl_reliability-based_2014}, or load-magnitude proxies in place of stress \citep{nguyen_theoretical_2024,ferri_balancing_2014,garcia-teruel_reliability-based_2021,cotten_multi-objective_2022}.

Author: ```suggestion
    Structural optimization of WECs faces an analogous compute bottleneck: FEA-based optimization is avoided in favor of commercial decoupled tools \citep{an_optimal_2024}, brute-force sweeps over analytical stress \citep{ambuhl_reliability-based_2014}, load-magnitude proxies in place of stress \citep{nguyen_theoretical_2024,ferri_balancing_2014,garcia-teruel_reliability-based_2021,cotten_multi-objective_2022}, or manual iteration \citep{RM3,mi_multi-scale_2025}.
    The last two studies \citep{RM3,mi_multi-scale_2025} notably encompass mooring, powertrain, controls, structures, and detailed economics.
```

>     The control co-design (CCD) literature \citet{garcia-sanz_control_2019,coe_useful_2023} emphasizes drivetrain dynamics and generator efficiency due to their strong effect on electrical power.

Author: ```suggestion
    The control co-design (CCD) literature \citep{garcia-sanz_control_2019,coe_useful_2023} emphasizes drivetrain dynamics and generator efficiency due to their strong effect on electrical power.
```

>     Recent joint PTO-and-controller optimizations \citet{rosati_control_2023,son_performance_2016,anderson_re-imagining_2024,devin_high-dimensional_2024,grasberger_control_2024,gaebele_tpl_2025} often leverage the pseudo-spectral method to embed time-domain constraints in frequency-domain hydrodynamics.

Author: ```suggestion
    Recent joint PTO-and-controller optimizations \citep{rosati_control_2023,son_performance_2016,anderson_re-imagining_2024,devin_high-dimensional_2024,grasberger_control_2024,gaebele_tpl_2025} often leverage the pseudo-spectral method to embed time-domain constraints in frequency-domain hydrodynamics.
```

>     Of these, \citet{gaebele_tpl_2025} directly addresses RM3, finding a 0.55 scaling factor optimizes power per unit surface area with frequently active continuous-torque constraints.

Author: ```suggestion
    Of these, \citet{gaebele_tpl_2025} directly addresses RM3, finding that a 0.55 scaling factor optimizes power per unit surface area with frequently active continuous-torque constraints.
```

>     \citet{lin_fast_2025} introduces a CCD formulation faster than PS by leveraging Pontryagin's maximum principle analytically; \citet{abdulkadir_optimal_2024} uses PMP for PTO-constrained array dynamics; \citet{herber_dynamic_2014} performs direct-transcription co-optimization of cylinder draft and radius with control.

Author: ```suggestion
    \citet{lin_fast_2025} introduces a CCD formulation faster than PS by leveraging Pontryagin's maximum principle analytically; \citet{abdulkadir_optimal_2024} use PMP for PTO-constrained array dynamics; \citet{herber_dynamic_2014} performs direct-transcription co-optimization of cylinder draft and radius with control.
```

    Several studies have independently concluded that significantly undersizing the PTO and accepting force saturation is favorable.

>     \citet{mcgilton_optimal_2024} reports only 3\% energy loss from a 70\% force-rating reduction across multiple device archetypes (RM3, RM5), sites, and scales, supporting analytical predictions in \citep{coe_maybe_2021,devin_high-dimensional_2024}.

Author: ```suggestion
    \citet{mcgilton_optimal_2024} reports only 3\% energy loss from a 70\% force-rating reduction across multiple device archetypes (RM3, RM5), sites, and scales, supporting analytical predictions \citep{coe_maybe_2021,devin_high-dimensional_2024}.
```

    None of these studies perform full economic analysis to confirm that the cost savings outweigh the power decrease --- a gap this paper addresses.
    \else

>     Of the multi-discipline studies in \Cref{remdo:tab:lit}, the largest in scope are those summarized in the studies \citep{khanal_multi-objective_2024,gaudin_single_2021,edwards_optimisation_2022,garcia-teruel_reliability-based_2021,garcia-teruel_design_2022,cotten_multi-objective_2022}, spanning four-WEC array layout, hydrodynamics, controls, economics, high-dimensional site/layout/mooring, shape with stability constraints, and power-versus-structure trade-offs.

Author: ```suggestion
    Of the multi-discipline studies in \Cref{remdo:tab:lit}, the largest in scope are those of \citet{khanal_multi-objective_2024,gaudin_single_2021,edwards_optimisation_2022,garcia-teruel_reliability-based_2021,garcia-teruel_design_2022,cotten_multi-objective_2022}, spanning four-WEC array layout, hydrodynamics, controls, economics, high-dimensional site/layout/mooring, shape with stability constraints, and power-versus-structure trade-offs.
```

    All large-scale ($\geq 8$ design variables) WEC optimizations use the genetic algorithm; local optimization is limited to small design spaces or frequency-domain settings due to time-domain simulation cost \citep{housner_numerical_2024,garcia-teruel_reliability-based_2021,garcia-teruel_design_2022,cotten_multi-objective_2022,martins_engineering_2022}.
    Structural optimization faces a parallel compute bottleneck, with FEA-based optimization usually replaced by manual iteration \citep{RM3,mi_multi-scale_2025}, commercial decoupled tools \citep{an_optimal_2024}, brute-force sweeps over analytical stress \citep{ambuhl_reliability-based_2014}, or load-magnitude proxies \citep{nguyen_theoretical_2024,ferri_balancing_2014}.

>     The control co-design literature \citet{garcia-sanz_control_2019,coe_useful_2023} has produced joint PTO-and-controller optimizations \citet{rosati_control_2023,son_performance_2016,anderson_re-imagining_2024,devin_high-dimensional_2024,grasberger_control_2024,gaebele_tpl_2025} often leveraging the pseudo-spectral method; \citet{gaebele_tpl_2025} directly addresses RM3 and finds a 0.55 scaling factor optimal.

Author: ```suggestion
    The control co-design literature \citet{garcia-sanz_control_2019,coe_useful_2023} has produced joint PTO-and-controller optimizations \citet{rosati_control_2023,son_performance_2016,anderson_re-imagining_2024,devin_high-dimensional_2024,grasberger_control_2024,gaebele_tpl_2025} often leveraging the pseudo-spectral method;
    \citet{gaebele_tpl_2025} directly addresses RM3 and finds a 0.55 scaling factor optimal.
```

    Several studies independently conclude that undersizing the PTO and accepting force saturation is favorable: \citet{mcgilton_optimal_2024} reports only 3\% energy loss from a 70\% force-rating reduction across archetypes, sites, and scales, supporting analytical predictions made in other studies \citep{coe_maybe_2021,devin_high-dimensional_2024}.
    None perform a full economic analysis to confirm cost savings exceed power loss, a gap this paper addresses.
    \fi

    % Gaps
    \ifdefined\DISSERTATION
    The literature review reveals that no existing optimization study includes dimensional, structural, and PTO design variables simultaneously.

>     The closest are the studies \citep{ambuhl_reliability-based_2014} (dimensional and structural) and the study \citep{grasberger_control_2024} (dimensional and PTO).

Author: ```suggestion
    The closest are the studies by \citet{ambuhl_reliability-based_2014} (dimensional and structural) and by \citet{grasberger_control_2024} (dimensional and PTO).
```

    There is also a gap of work that uses a scalable optimization framework to trade off power production with survivability while accurately modeling stress as a function of bulk dimensions, rather than using force as a proxy.
    The closest is \citet{rosati_control_2023}, which minimizes a cost proxy incorporating PTO and valve material cost but assumes constant structural material cost.
    Given the coupling among these disciplines, a system-level optimization considering them all is needed.

>     Part of the issue is the lack of a multidisciplinary WEC simulation platform sufficiently fast for optimization: the popular time-domain hydrodynamics tool WEC-Sim \citet{ruehl_wec-simwec-sim_2024} is too slow for large-scale optimization \citet{housner_numerical_2024}, while the newer pseudo-spectral tool WecOptTool \citet{coe_initial_2020} is faster and suited to control co-design but currently limited to hydrodynamics and control.

Author: ```suggestion
    Part of the issue is the lack of a multidisciplinary WEC simulation platform sufficiently fast for optimization: the popular time-domain hydrodynamics tool WEC-Sim \citep{ruehl_wec-simwec-sim_2024} is too slow for large-scale optimization \citep{housner_numerical_2024}, while the newer pseudo-spectral tool WecOptTool \citep{coe_initial_2020} is faster and suited to control co-design but currently limited to hydrodynamics and control.
```

    Finally, several studies note that cost-model uncertainty may significantly affect results, evidencing the need for sensitivity analysis.
\else

>     No existing optimization study simultaneously includes dimensional, structural, and PTO design variables: the closest are the studies \citep{ambuhl_reliability-based_2014,grasberger_control_2024}, covering dimensional-and-structural and dimensional-and-PTO formulations respectively.

Author: ```suggestion
    No existing optimization study simultaneously includes dimensional, structural, and PTO design variables: the closest are the studies by \citet{ambuhl_reliability-based_2014,grasberger_control_2024}, covering dimensional-and-structural and dimensional-and-PTO formulations respectively.
```

    A parallel gap exists in trading off power against survivability with stress modeled as a function of bulk dimensions rather than force as a proxy.

>     The lack of a multidisciplinary WEC simulation platform fast enough for optimization is part of the issue (e.g., WEC-Sim \citet{ruehl_wec-simwec-sim_2024} is too slow at scale \citet{housner_numerical_2024}, and WecOptTool \citet{coe_initial_2020} is currently limited to hydrodynamics and control) and cost-model uncertainty in prior work evidences the need for sensitivity analysis.

Author: ```suggestion
    The lack of a multidisciplinary WEC simulation platform fast enough for optimization is part of the issue (e.g., WEC-Sim \citep{ruehl_wec-simwec-sim_2024} is too slow at scale \citep{housner_numerical_2024}, and WecOptTool \citep{coe_initial_2020} is currently limited to hydrodynamics and control).
    Cost-model uncertainty in prior work \citep{mccabe_multidisciplinary_2022} evidences the need for sensitivity analysis.
```

%(Why MDO):
\ifdefined\DISSERTATION
    Multidisciplinary Design Optimization (MDO) is a quantitative methodology for formulating, solving, and interpreting complex engineering design problems involving multiple coupled disciplines \citep{agte_mdo_2010}.
    The method emphasizes that comprehensive consideration of inter-disciplinary coupling typically yields designs that outperform those found by sequential single-discipline optimization \citep{martins_multidisciplinary_2013}.
    MDO falls under the broader umbrella of concurrent design and, when controls is one of the disciplines, constitutes a form of control co-design.
    The field originated in structural optimization, is well-established in aerospace, and is gaining traction in the broader energy industry, particularly in floating offshore wind \citep{abbas_control_2024,jasa_effectively_2022,patryniak_multidisciplinary_2022}.

    Despite recognized need and growing interest in concurrent design and control co-design for WECs \citep{mi_multi-scale_2025,ringwood_empowering_2023}, MDO has not yet caught on in the wave energy space, preventing potential techno-economic breakthroughs.

>     Only two existing studies \citet{mccabe_multidisciplinary_2022,khanal_multi-objective_2024} approach WEC design explicitly from an MDO perspective.

Author: ```suggestion
    Only two existing studies \citep{mccabe_multidisciplinary_2022,khanal_multi-objective_2024} approach WEC design explicitly from an MDO perspective.
```

>     The present study builds directly on \citep{mccabe_multidisciplinary_2022}, a preliminary MDO formulation by the same authors that used substantially less accurate models and fewer design variables.

Author: ```suggestion
    The present study builds directly on \citet{mccabe_multidisciplinary_2022}, a preliminary MDO formulation by the same authors that used substantially less accurate models and fewer design variables.
```

    \citet{khanal_multi-objective_2024} adds a Sobol global sensitivity analysis to a basic MDO formulation.
    Neither provides a comprehensive description of how the MDO approach influences model development and problem formulation, which this paper provides alongside results and insights from a much more comprehensive WEC optimization.

    The remaining WEC papers discussed as multidisciplinary do not explicitly invoke MDO and sometimes do not adhere to the principle of adequately capturing inter-disciplinary coupling.
    For instance, \citet{edwards_optimisation_2022} minimizes surface material for only the subset of designs achieving maximum power, which fails to account for the power--cost tradeoff: the minimum cost-to-power ratio may occur at a design that sacrifices some power for significant cost savings.

    Semi-analytical models offer a uniquely suitable combination of speed and accuracy for early-stage WEC optimization, where the model must be run thousands of times and where smooth dependence on inputs facilitates accurate gradients \citep{mccabe_development_2026}.

>     This study uses the MDOcean framework \citet{mccabe_development_2026}, which integrates semi-analytical models across hydrodynamics, dynamics and control, structures, and economics, to enable a WEC optimization of unprecedented scope.

Author: ```suggestion
    This study uses the MDOcean framework \citep{mccabe_development_2026}, which integrates semi-analytical models across hydrodynamics, dynamics and control, structures, and economics, to enable a WEC optimization of unprecedented scope.
```

\else
    Multidisciplinary Design Optimization (MDO) is a quantitative methodology for formulating, solving, and interpreting design problems involving multiple coupled disciplines \citep{agte_mdo_2010}, highlighting that comprehensive consideration of coupling typically outperforms sequential single-discipline optimization \citep{martins_multidisciplinary_2013}.

>     Originating in structural optimization and established in aerospace, MDO is gaining traction in floating offshore wind \citet{abbas_control_2024,jasa_effectively_2022,patryniak_multidisciplinary_2022} but has not yet caught on in wave energy despite recognized need \citep{mi_multi-scale_2025,ringwood_empowering_2023}.

Author: ```suggestion
    Originating in structural optimization and established in aerospace, MDO is gaining traction in floating offshore wind \citep{abbas_control_2024,jasa_effectively_2022,patryniak_multidisciplinary_2022} but has not yet caught on in wave energy despite recognized need \citep{mi_multi-scale_2025,ringwood_empowering_2023}.
```

    Only two existing studies approach WEC design explicitly from an MDO perspective: \citet{mccabe_multidisciplinary_2022}, a preliminary formulation by the same authors using less accurate models and fewer design variables, and \citet{khanal_multi-objective_2024}, which adds Sobol global sensitivity.
    Other multidisciplinary WEC papers do not explicitly invoke MDO and sometimes neglect the coupling principle: for example, \citet{edwards_optimisation_2022} minimizes surface material only over designs achieving maximum power, missing the power--cost tradeoff where the minimum cost-to-power ratio may sacrifice some power for significant cost savings.

>     This study uses the MDOcean framework \citet{mccabe_development_2026}, which integrates semi-analytical models across hydrodynamics, dynamics and control, structures, and economics, to enable a WEC optimization of unprecedented scope.

Author: ```suggestion
    This study uses the MDOcean framework \citep{mccabe_development_2026}, which integrates semi-analytical models across hydrodynamics, dynamics and control, structures, and economics, to enable a WEC optimization of unprecedented scope.
```

\fi

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\subsection{Paper Contributions and Roadmap}
\ifdefined\DISSERTATION

>     This paper applies the MDOcean framework \citet{mccabe_development_2026} to what is believed to be the most comprehensive WEC techno-economic design optimization to date.

Author: ```suggestion
    This paper applies the MDOcean framework \citep{mccabe_development_2026} to what is believed to be the most comprehensive WEC techno-economic design optimization to date.
```

    The framework is scalable to additional disciplines and design variables and is ultimately intended to enable systematic comparison across WEC architectures.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.

>     \Cref{remdo:sec:optim-methods} describes the optimization methodology, including the underlying model overview and references to \citet{mccabe_development_2026} for modeling details.

Author: ```suggestion
    \Cref{remdo:sec:optim-methods} describes the optimization methodology including the underlying model topology, although modeling details are published separately \citep{mccabe_development_2026}.
```

    \Cref{remdo:sec:formulation} develops the optimization problem formulation.
    \Cref{remdo:sec:optim-process} details the solution procedure.
    \Cref{remdo:sec:results} presents single-objective optimization, sensitivity analysis, and multi-objective optimization results.
    \Cref{remdo:sec:discussion} interprets the trends, presents three representative optimal designs, and outlines future work.
\else

>     This paper applies the MDOcean framework \citet{mccabe_development_2026} to what is believed to be the most comprehensive WEC techno-economic design optimization to date.

Author: ```suggestion
    This paper applies the MDOcean framework \citep{mccabe_development_2026} to what is believed to be the most comprehensive WEC techno-economic design optimization to date.
```

    The contributions are: a multidisciplinary problem formulation simultaneously varying 12 design variables across bulk dimensions, structural thicknesses, and powertrain ratings subject to static, dynamic, structural, and operational constraints;
    a solution methodology combining sequential quadratic programming with multistart and an epsilon-constraint-plus-pattern-search procedure for multi-objective optimization;
    single- and multi-objective results with sensitivity analysis revealing drivers of LCOE, cost, and power, and identifying a non-convex Pareto cusp tied to a force-saturation to power-saturation strategy shift;
    and design recommendations distinguishing utility-scale from \emph{Powering the Blue Economy} applications.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.

>     \Cref{remdo:sec:optim-methods} describes the optimization methodology and references \citet{mccabe_development_2026} for the underlying simulation model.

Author: ```suggestion
    \Cref{remdo:sec:optim-methods} describes the optimization methodology, and \citet{mccabe_development_2026} describes the underlying simulation model.
```
